NMS-14617: Quick Start: Set up a Threshold (#5268)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/operation/pages/quick-start/thresholding.adoc

[[setup-threshold]]
= Step 5: Set up a Threshold

> A threshold defines limits against network performance metrics (CPU load, bandwidth, disk space, and so on) of a managed entity to trigger an xref:deep-dive/events/introduction.adoc[event] (record) when a data source value goes above or below the specified limit:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A threshold defines limits against the network performance metrics (CPU load, bandwidth, disk space, and so on) of a managed entity to trigger an xref:deep-dive/events/introduction.adoc[event] (record) when a data source value goes above or below the specified limit:
```

* Relative change - changes by percent (for example, available disk space changes more than 5% from the last poll).

These thresholds can be basic (tested against a single value) or an expression (evaluated against multiple values in an expression).
This Quick Start guide shows how to create both kinds of threshold.

[[threshold-basic]]
== Create a basic threshold

This procedure describes how to create a basic threshold for a single, system-wide variable: the number of logged-in users.
This threshold tells {page-component-title} to create an event when the number of logged-in users on the device exceeds two, and re-arm when it falls below two.

Before creating this threshold, make sure you have at least two users defined in your {page-component-title} instance (see <<quick-start/users.adoc#create-user, Create a new user>>).

. Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right of the screen.
. Under *Performance Measurement*, choose *Configure Thresholds*.
+
A screen with a list of preconfigured threshold groups appears.

> We will work with `netsnmp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will work with `netsnmp`.
+
```

For information on how to create a threshold group, see xref:deep-dive/thresholds/thresh-group.adoc[Create a Threshold Group] in the Deep Dive section.
. Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.
. Click *Create New Threshold* at the bottom of the *Basic Thresholds* area of the screen.

> . Set the following information and click *Save*:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Set the following information and click *Save*:
+
```

[options="header"]
[cols="1,3,2"]
|===
| Field
| Description
| Input value

| Type
| Triggers an event when the data source value equals or exceeds the threshold value, and re-arms when it equals or drops below the re-arm value.
| high

| Datasource
| Name of the data source you want to threshold against.
For this tutorial, we have provided the data source for logged-in users.
For information on how to determine a metric's data source, see xref:operation:deep-dive/thresholds/datasource.adoc#datasource-determine[Determine the data source] in the Deep Dive section.

> | hrSystemNumUsers
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| hrSystemNumUsers

```

| Datasource label
| Optional text label.
Not required for this Quick Start guide.
| Leave blank.

| Value
| The value above which you want to trigger an event.
In this case, we want to trigger an event when the number of logged-in users exceeds two.
| 2

| Re-arm
| The value below which we want the system to re-arm.
In this case, once the number of logged-in users falls below two.
| 2

> | Trigger| The number of consecutive times the threshold value can occur before the system triggers an event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Trigger
| The number of consecutive times the threshold value can occur before the system triggers an event.
```

> Since our default polling period is 5 minutes, a value of 3 means {page-component-title} would create a threshold event if there are more than 2 users for 15 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since our default polling period is five minutes, a value of three means {page-component-title} would create a threshold event if there are more than two users logged in for 15 minutes.
```

| 3

| Description
| Optional text to describe your threshold.
| Two users

| Triggered UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is triggered.
A custom UEI for each threshold makes it easier to xref:deep-dive/notifications/introduction.adoc[create notifications].
If left blank, it defaults to the standard thresholds UEIs.
| Leave blank.

| Re-armed UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is re-armed.
| Leave blank.
|===

[[threshold-test]]
== Test the threshold

To test the threshold you just created, follow these steps:

> . Log two accounts into the node that you are monitoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Log in to the monitored node using two user accounts.
```

. Choose menu:Status[Events > All Events].
+
You should see an event that indicates your threshold triggered when more than one user logged in.

. Log one user out of the node.
+
The *Events* page should indicate that the system has re-armed.

[[thresh-cpu]]
== Expression-based thresholds

By default, {page-component-title} includes two expression-based thresholds.
This section explains the threshold for CPU use, where {page-component-title} will create an event when the five-minute CPU load average metric reaches or goes above 70% for two consecutive measurement intervals.

Expression-based thresholds are useful when you need to threshold on a percentage, not the actual value of the data collected.

NOTE: Expression-based thresholds work only if the data sources in question are in the same directory.

To view the expression-based threshold for CPU use, follow these steps:

. Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right of the screen.
. Under *Performance Measurement*, choose *Configure Thresholds*.
. Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.

> . In the *Expression-based Thresholds* area, view the first threshold (with the description "Trigger an alert when five...").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Expression-based Thresholds* area, view the first threshold (with the description "Trigger an alert when five ...").
```

+
The following table describes the fields:
+
[options="header"]
[cols="1,3,3"]
|===
| Field
| Description
| Value

| Type
| Triggers an event when the data source value equals or exceeds the threshold value, and re-arms when it equals or drops below the re-arm value.
| high

| Expression

> | Divides the five-minute CPU load average by 100 (to obtain the effective load average^1^), which is then divided by the number of CPUs.
> This value is then multiplied by 100 to provide a percentage.
> 
> (^1^SNMP does not report in decimals, which is why the expression divides the loadavg5 by 100.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Divides the five-minute CPU load average by 100 (to obtain the effective load average^1^), which is then divided by the number of CPUs.
This value is then multiplied by 100 to provide a percentage.
+
(^1^SNMP does not report in decimals, which is why the expression divides the loadavg5 by 100.)
```

| ((loadavg5 / 100) / CpuNumCpus) * 100

| Datasource type
| The type of data source from which you are collecting data.
| node

| Datasource label
| Optional text label.
Not required for this Quick Start guide.
| Leave blank.

| Value
| Trigger an event when the five-minute CPU load average goes above 70%.
| 70

| Re-arm
| Re-arm the system when the five-minute CPU load average drops below 50%.
| 50

| Trigger
| The number of consecutive times the threshold value can occur before the system triggers an event.

> In this case, when the five-minute CPU load average goes above 70% for two consecutive polling periods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, it is triggered when the five-minute CPU load average goes above 70% for two consecutive polling periods.
```

[[setup-threshold]]
= Step 5: Set up a Threshold

A threshold defines limits against the network performance metrics (CPU load, bandwidth, disk space, and so on) of a managed entity to trigger an xref:deep-dive/events/introduction.adoc[event] (record) when a data source value goes above or below the specified limit:

* High - equals or exceeds the threshold value, and re-arms when it equals or drops below the re-arm value (for example, bandwidth use exceeds the specified amount).
* Low - equals or drops below the threshold value and re-arms when it equals or comes back up above the re-arm value (for example, available disk space falls under the specified value).
* Absolute change - changes by the specified amount (for example, on a fiber-optic link, a change in loss of anything greater than 3 dB is a problem regardless of what the original or final value is).
* Relative change - changes by percent (for example, available disk space changes more than 5% from the last poll).

> These thresholds can be basic (tested against a single value) or an expression (evaluated against multiple values in an expression).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These thresholds can be basic (tested against a single value) or expression-based (evaluated against multiple values in an expression).
```

This Quick Start guide shows how to create both kinds of threshold.

[[threshold-basic]]
== Create a basic threshold

This procedure describes how to create a basic threshold for a single, system-wide variable: the number of logged-in users.
This threshold tells {page-component-title} to create an event when the number of logged-in users on the device exceeds two, and re-arm when it falls below two.

Before creating this threshold, make sure you have at least two users defined in your {page-component-title} instance (see <<quick-start/users.adoc#create-user, Create a new user>>).

. Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right of the screen.

> . Under *Performance Measurement*, choose *Configure Thresholds*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Under Performance Measurement, click *Configure Thresholds*.
```

+
A screen with a list of preconfigured threshold groups appears.
We will work with `netsnmp`.
+
For information on how to create a threshold group, see xref:deep-dive/thresholds/thresh-group.adoc[Create a Threshold Group] in the Deep Dive section.

> . Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

. Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.
```

> . Click *Create New Threshold* at the bottom of the *Basic Thresholds* area of the screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click *Create New Threshold* at the bottom of the *Basic Thresholds* area.
```

| 2

| Trigger
| The number of consecutive times the threshold value can occur before the system triggers an event.
Since our default polling period is five minutes, a value of three means {page-component-title} would create a threshold event if there are more than two users logged in for 15 minutes.
| 3

| Description
| Optional text to describe your threshold.
| Two users

| Triggered UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is triggered.
A custom UEI for each threshold makes it easier to xref:deep-dive/notifications/introduction.adoc[create notifications].
If left blank, it defaults to the standard thresholds UEIs.
| Leave blank.

| Re-armed UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is re-armed.
| Leave blank.
|===

[[threshold-test]]
== Test the threshold

To test the threshold you just created, follow these steps:

. Log in to the monitored node using two user accounts.
. Choose menu:Status[Events > All Events].
+
You should see an event that indicates your threshold triggered when more than one user logged in.

. Log one user out of the node.
+

> The *Events* page should indicate that the system has re-armed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Events page should indicate that the system has re-armed.
```

[[thresh-cpu]]
== Expression-based thresholds

By default, {page-component-title} includes two expression-based thresholds.
This section explains the threshold for CPU use, where {page-component-title} will create an event when the five-minute CPU load average metric reaches or goes above 70% for two consecutive measurement intervals.

Expression-based thresholds are useful when you need to threshold on a percentage, not the actual value of the data collected.

NOTE: Expression-based thresholds work only if the data sources in question are in the same directory.

To view the expression-based threshold for CPU use, follow these steps:

. Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right of the screen.

> . Under *Performance Measurement*, choose *Configure Thresholds*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Under Performance Measurement, click *Configure Thresholds*.
```

. Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.

> . In the *Expression-based Thresholds* area, view the first threshold (with the description "Trigger an alert when five ...").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the Expression-based Thresholds area, view the first threshold (with the description "Trigger an alert when five ...").
```

These thresholds can be basic (tested against a single value) or expression-based (evaluated against multiple values in an expression).
This Quick Start guide shows how to create both kinds of threshold.

[[threshold-basic]]
== Create a basic threshold

This procedure describes how to create a basic threshold for a single, system-wide variable: the number of logged-in users.
This threshold tells {page-component-title} to create an event when the number of logged-in users on the device exceeds two, and re-arm when it falls below two.

Before creating this threshold, make sure you have at least two users defined in your {page-component-title} instance (see <<quick-start/users.adoc#create-user, Create a new user>>).

. Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right of the screen.
. Under Performance Measurement, click *Configure Thresholds*.
+
A screen with a list of preconfigured threshold groups appears.
We will work with `netsnmp`.
+
For information on how to create a threshold group, see xref:deep-dive/thresholds/thresh-group.adoc[Create a Threshold Group] in the Deep Dive section.

. Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.

> . Click *Create New Threshold* at the bottom of the *Basic Thresholds* area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click *Create New Threshold* at the bottom of the Basic Thresholds area.
```

| 2

| Re-arm
| The value below which we want the system to re-arm.
In this case, once the number of logged-in users falls below two.
| 2

| Trigger
| The number of consecutive times the threshold value can occur before the system triggers an event.
Since our default polling period is five minutes, a value of three means {page-component-title} would create a threshold event if there are more than two users logged in for 15 minutes.
| 3

| Description
| Optional text to describe your threshold.
| Two users

| Triggered UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is triggered.
A custom UEI for each threshold makes it easier to xref:deep-dive/notifications/introduction.adoc[create notifications].
If left blank, it defaults to the standard thresholds UEIs.
| Leave blank.

| Re-armed UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is re-armed.
| Leave blank.
|===

[[threshold-test]]
== Test the threshold

To test the threshold you just created, follow these steps:

. Log in to the monitored node using two user accounts.
. In the main menu, choose menu:Status[Events].

> . Under Event Queries, click *All events*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Under Event Queries, click *All Events*.
```

+
You should see an event that indicates your threshold triggered when more than one user logged in.

. Log one user out of the node.
+
The Events list page should indicate that the system has re-armed.

[[thresh-cpu]]
== Expression-based thresholds

By default, {page-component-title} includes two expression-based thresholds.
This section explains the threshold for CPU use, where {page-component-title} will create an event when the five-minute CPU load average metric reaches or goes above 70% for two consecutive measurement intervals.

Expression-based thresholds are useful when you need to threshold on a percentage, not the actual value of the data collected.

NOTE: Expression-based thresholds work only if the data sources in question are in the same directory.

To view the expression-based threshold for CPU use, follow these steps:

. Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right of the screen.
. Under Performance Measurement, click *Configure Thresholds*.
. Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.

> . In the Expression-based Thresholds area, view the first threshold (with the description "Trigger an alert when five ...").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the Expression-Based Thresholds area, view the first threshold (with the description "Trigger an alert when five ...").
```

| Datasource label
| Optional text label.

> Not required for this quick start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not required for this Quick Start guide.
```

| Description
| Optional text to describe your threshold.
| Two users

| Triggered UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is triggered.
A custom UEI for each threshold makes it easier to xref:deep-dive/notifications/introduction.adoc#ga-notifications-introduction[create notifications].
If left blank, it defaults to the standard thresholds UEIs.
| Leave blank.

| Re-armed UEI
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is re-armed.
| Leave blank.

|===

[[threshold-test]]
== Test the threshold

To test the threshold you just created, follow these steps:

> . Log a second person into the node you are monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Log two accounts in to the node that you are monitoring.
```

> . Choose menu:Status[Events>All events] to navigate to the *Events* page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Choose menu:Status[Events > All Events].
```

+
You should see an event that indicates your threshold triggered when more than one user logged in.

. Log out the second user.
+
The *Events* page should indicate that the system has re-armed.

[[thresh-cpu]]
== Expression-based thresholds

By default, {page-component-title} includes two expression-based thresholds.
This section explains the threshold for CPU use, where {page-component-title} will create an event when the five-minute CPU load average metric reaches or goes above 70% for two consecutive measurement intervals.

Expression-based thresholds are useful when you need to threshold on a percentage, not the actual value of the data collected.

NOTE: Expression-based thresholds work only if the data sources in question are in the same directory.

To view the expression-based threshold for CPU use, follow these steps:

> . Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the *Gear* symbol in the top-right of the screen.
```

. Under *Performance Measurement*, choose *Configure Thresholds*.

> . Click *Edit* beside the *netsnmp* group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click *Edit* beside the `netsnmp` group.
```

. In the *Expression-based Thresholds* area, view the first threshold (with the description "Trigger an alert when five...").
+
The following table describes the fields:
+
[options="header"]
[cols="1,3,3"]
|===

> 
> | Field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Field
```

| Datasource label
| Optional text label.

> Not required for this quick start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not required for this Quick Start guide.
```

> | blank

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Leave blank.
```

| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is triggered.

> A custom UEI for each threshold makes it easier to xref:deep-dive/notifications/introduction.adoc#ga-notifications-introduction[create notifications].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A custom UEI for each threshold makes it easier to xref:deep-dive/notifications/introduction.adoc[create notifications].
```

If left blank, it defaults to the standard thresholds UEIs.

> | blank

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Leave blank.
```

| Re-armed UEI

> | A custom unique event identifier (UEI) sent into the events system when the threshold is re-armed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| A custom unique event identifier (UEI) that is sent into the events system when the threshold is re-armed.
```

> | blank

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Leave blank.
```

> 
> |===

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|===
```
